The past five years have demonstrated at least one thing about election interference: though it keeps happening, nobody can agree on just what it is. The 2016 US elections served as a flashpoint in recognizing modern election interference, but there have been numerous instances of interference in other European elections that can provide valuable lessons, and this report aims to connect them into a coherent and singular framework. While not meant to be exhaustive, this report assesses four elections and a referendum that have been characterized by attempted foreign interference.

The five case studies were selected because they illustrate a variety of actions associated with modern cyber and information operations from both a technical and psychological perspective. Each case study summarizes the openly available information about these incidents and identifies the state sponsorship and actions involved per the definitions developed for this report. The main objective in releasing this work is to classify the reported interference actions that took place and propose the norms of state behavior and response that have emerged in this realm.

These cases focus on suspected Russian government efforts, as the Russian government is widely acknowledged as the most active state in this domain. Numerous governments and independent security researchers have provided ample forensic, doctrinal, and circumstantial evidence that links interference actions to the Russian government, most prominently the Russian military’s Main Intelligence Directorate (the Glavnoje Razvedyvatel’noje Upravlenije, or GRU). Nonetheless, this report makes an effort to identify specific sources and their basis for making claims of attribution to the Russian government.

Interference terminology
The following list of terms captures several of the actions commonly observed in modern cyber and information operations aimed at election interference as well as commonly documented levels of state involvement in those actions. Providing definitional clarity must be the key to wider public understanding and agreement on interference activities. A lack of specificity and consistency in terminology has contributed greatly to the confusion surrounding a number of the interference cases discussed in this report. If there is a single lesson from cyber activity over the last decade, it is that states must have a common lexicon in order to respond to cyber threats. It is not enough to simply speak of “hacking the vote.” Hopefully, by providing these initial terms, this report can spur a wider discussion on defining actions and sponsorship in this domain.
