If you want to know what a US tech crackdown may look like, check out what Europe did
As U.S. regulators and lawmakers step up their efforts to reign in big tech companies, Europe offers some valuable insight. Google has been fined a combined $9.5 billion since 2017 for by EU antitrust regulators. Facebook, Amazon and Apple are also facing investigations across Europe.

Europe has made its name as the top cop of tech regulation. The European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, has imposed a combined $9.5 billion in antitrust fines against Google since 2017, and its boss hints Amazon and Apple might be next in line. Facebook, meanwhile, has been subject to probes from competition and data protection authorities across the EU since the region’s strict new set of privacy rules called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) went into effect last year.

As U.S. regulators and lawmakers step up their efforts to reign in big tech companies, Europe offers some valuable lessons. “You’ve seen a lot of proxy wars go on here because of the nature of the fact that we’ve got one Europe-wide regulator for antitrust, and the laws are clear, and that regulator definitely has teeth,” Mark MacGann, Uber’s former head of public policy in Europe and founder of venture capital and advisory firm Moonshot Ventures, told CNBC in an interview.

When it comes to enforcement, the European Commission has opted for fines and mandates for tech companies to their change in business practices, rather than arguing to break them up, said John Cassels, a partner who specializes in competition law at European firm Fieldfisher, in an interview. This tactic could put Europe’s approach at odds with some U.S. lawmakers touting strong rhetoric about dismantling big tech companies. The EU’s fines have done little to dent any tech companies’ profits.

Alphabet subsidiary Google has faced the toughest antitrust action. In March, the European Commission levied a $1.7 billion fine on the tech giant for abusing its dominance in the online advertising market, citing “illegal” practices of restricting competitors’ ads in search results. The fine marked the third consecutive year of antitrust rulings on Google from the EU. In 2018, the regulator charged Google with a record $5.1 billion fine for anti-competitive practices on its Android devices, saying the company had forced device makers to pre-install its own apps. Analysts at Evercore ISI wrote in note last week they expect the U.S. Department of Justice could take cues from this specific case, which forced Google to offer browser and search-app alternatives on Android devices.

The European Commission first went after Google in 2017 with a $2.7 billion fine for abusing its dominance as a search engine. The EU accused Google of favoring its own comparison shopping service over competitors’ in search results. Legal experts said the 2017 findings, which were released after a nearly seven-year investigation, could also serve as a guide for antitrust action in the U.S. when it comes to Google’s search practices. But they also cautioned it’s easier to prove market dominance under EU legal standards than in the U.S. “In the U.S. the thresholds are higher and the FTC and DOJ are sort of put to the test by courts,” Fieldfisher’s Cassels said.